feat: blog post on avoiding try...catch if possible (#326)
JoshuaKGoldberg/joshuakgoldberg-dot-com: src/content/blog/try-catch-as-little-as-possible/index.mdx

---

> description: "This is my standard explainer for pull request reviews where a try...catch statement is used more than I think it needs to be."

Author: Maybe...

```suggestion
description: "This is a general explainer for pull request reviews where a try...catch statement is used more than I think it needs to be."
```

When as `try...catch` statement is unavoidable, I advise putting as little code as possible inside.

<LabeledVideo
	alt="Zach Galifanakis from 'The Hangover' angrily saying 'check yourself... before you wreck yourself'."
	description="Listen to Alan. Knowing the correct ways of self-checking will reduce occurrences of self-wrecking."
	original="https://tenor.com/view/hangover-gif-12838870"
	src={checkYourselfBeforeYouWreckYourselfZach}
/>

## Avoid `try...catch` if possible

I advise using `try...catch` statements as little as possible.
They should only ever be used when in _exception_ cases: ones that aren't expected to happen normally, or when an API outside of your control might throw.

If you know some situation will happen in code, your code should handle it as directly as possible.
If something is crashing, figure out the root cause of _why_ it's crashing, and handle that root cause.

> 👉 See [Checking Before Wrecking](#checking-before-wrecking) below for an example.

## Reducing `try...catch` scope as much as possible

If you absolutely must use a `try...catch`, try to put as little as possible inside it.

`try...catch` statements are a very blunt tool.

> They catch _any_ exception, including ones that you might not expect them too.

Author: ```suggestion
They catch _any_ exception, including ones that you might not expect.
```

Instead of wrapping large swathes of code in a `try...catch`, wrap only the specific piece of code that is expected to throw.

> > 👉 See [trying-less](#trying-less) below for an example.

Author: ```suggestion
> 👉 See [Trying Less](#trying-less) below for an example.
```

async function fileIncludes(filePath: string, search: string) {
	// 🛑 See later - there's a better way!
	try {
		const data = await fs.readFile(filePath);
		const text = data.toString();

		return text.includes(search);
	} catch (error) {
		console.warn(`Failed to read ${filePath}:`, error);
		return false;
	}
}
```

There's no need to wrap _all_ of the code inside `fileIncludes` in the `try...catch`.
Only the call to `fs.readFile` is expected to throw.
Even if another line of code were to throw, it wouldn't likely be for the logged reason _"Failed to read ..."_.

A more targeted strategy would be to only wrap the one line in a `try...catch`:

```ts
import fs from "node:fs/promises";

async function fileIncludes(filePath: string, search: string) {
	let data;

	try {
		data = await fs.readFile(filePath);
	} catch (error) {
		console.warn(`Failed to read ${filePath}:`, error);
		return false;
	}

	const text = data.toString();

	return text.includes(search);
}
```

This way, only the one line that might throw an error is handled by the `try...catch`.
Developers reading the `fileIncludes` function can more easily understand what specifically might fail.

> Any other unexpected error that occurs would fall back to however the project handles unexpected errors.

Author: ```suggestion
Any other unexpected exception that occurs would fall back to however the project handles unexpected exceptions.
```

	original="https://tenor.com/view/wreck-check-yourself-before-you-wreck-yourself-check-yo-self-ice-cube-gif-5076649"
	src={checkYourselfBeforeYouWreckYourselfIce}
/>

## Further Reading

If you want to read more about why `try...catch` is something to avoid when possible, I recommend:

- [Exceptions as a form of control flow are inherently difficult to reason about](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/189222/are-exceptions-as-control-flow-considered-a-serious-antipattern-if-so-why)
- [Thrown errors can't be modeled by type systems like TypeScript's](https://www.learningtypescript.com/articles/why-typescript-doesnt-include-a-throws-keyword)

## Don't be afraid to ask for help

It's ok if you're having a hard time figuring out the right way to safely handle errors in code!
I want open source software to be a warm, welcoming place.
Nobody should feel intimidated asking me for help with code.

Go ahead and post a comment explaining what you've tried, what did or didn't work, and any specific questions you have.
I'll be happy to give you pointers and work with you to write the code safely.

> Thank you for sending a pull request in, let alone working with me on getting it approved! 💙

Author: As much as I want to include some welcoming note... I suspect these blog posts could be useful to other people. I'll probably remove this in favor of staying welcoming in my PR reviews.
